We can use a bitwise operator to toggle nth bit
in a number.
So what do you think, which operator can we use
for that? We can use bitwise XOR operator. Because
if we do bitwise XOR between zero and one
we will get one and if we do bitwise XOR
between one and one, we will get zero.
So what we can do here is, we can create
a bit mask with nth bit alone set to one.
now if we do bitwise XOR between the number
and the bit mask, the value at the nth bit
will be toggled.
That is, if we have zero, it will become one.
And if we have one, it will become zero.
So let us take an example. Here the number is 28
we have to toggle the second bit
So n is equal to two here. So let us create a
bitmask with second bit set to one
So to do that, take one and perform n-1
left shifts. So perform one left shift one and
our bit mask is ready.
Now let us do bitwise XOR operation between number 28 the
created bit mask. Thus the second bit is toggled.
That is, zero in the second bit has
changed to one.
And as we learnt, the remaining bits will remain
unchanged because when we perform bitwise XOR operation with
zero, the bit's value will not change
as one XOR zero is one and zero XOR zero is zero. So the second
bit is toggled and the new value in num is
Now let us take the same number 28. Let us
now toggle the fifth bit.
So let us create a bit mask with the fifth
bit set to one.
So to do that, take one and perform four left shifts
and it is ready
And now let us do bitwise xor operation
between the number and the created bitmask.
And thus the fifth bit is toggled. That is one
in the fifth bit has changed to zero and the
remaining bits will remain unchanged.
So after toggling the fifth bit the new value in num is 16